m00012

0df3f0ae-9085-473a-adc2-5c5b3833e3f3

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

# Learning Objectives {#sect-00008}

After completing this section, you should be able to:

Represent subsets and proper subsets symbolically.

Compute the number of subsets of a set.

Apply concepts of subsets and equivalent sets to finite and infinite
sets.

The rules of Major League Soccer (MLS) allow each team to have up to 30
players on their team. However, only 18 of these players can be listed
on the game day roster, and of the 18 listed, 11 players must be
selected to start the game. How the coaches and general managers form
the team and choose the starters for each game will determine the
success of the team in any given year.

The entire group of 30 players is each team's set. The group of game day
players is a subset of the team set, and the group of 11 starters is a
subset of both the team set and the set of players on the game day
roster.

Set A is a subset of set B if every member of set A is also a member of
set B. Symbolically, this relationship is written as A⊆B.

Sets can be related to each other in several different ways: they may
not share any members in common, they may share some members in common,
or they may share all members in common. In this section, we will
explore the way we can select a group of members from the whole set.

:::: {#note-00018 .note}
::: title
:::

*Every set is also a subset of itself, B⊆B*
::::

Recall the set of flatware in our kitchen drawer from [Section 1.1](#),
F={fork, spoon, knife, meat thermometer, can opener}. Suppose you are
preparing to eat dinner, so you pull a fork and a knife from the drawer
to set the table. The set D={knife, fork} is a subset of set F, because
every member or element of set D is also a member of set F. More
specifically, set D is a proper subset of set F, because there are other
members of set F not in set D. This is written as D⊂F. The only subset
of a set that is not a proper subset of the set would be the set itself.

:::: {#note-00015 .note}
::: title
:::

*The empty set or null set, ∅, is a proper subset of every set, except
itself.*
::::

Graphically, sets are often represented as circles. In the following
graphic, set A is represented as a circle completely enclosed inside the
circle representing set B, showing that set A is a proper subset of set
B. The element x represents an element that is in both set A and set B.

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

:::: {#note-00016 .note}
::: title
:::

*While we can list all the subsets of a finite set, it is not possible
to list all the possible subsets of an infinite set, as it would take an
infinitely long time.*
::::

:::: {#exam-00001 .example}
::: title
Listing All the Proper Subsets of a Finite Set
:::

Set L is a set of reading materials available in a shop at the airport,
L={newspaper, magazine, book}. List all the subsets of set L.

*Step 1:* It is best to begin with the set itself, as every set is a
subset of itself. In our example, the cardinality of set L is n(L)=3.
There is only one subset of set L that has the same number of elements
of set L:{newspaper,magazine,book }.

*Step 2:* Next, list all the proper subsets of the set containing n(L)−1
elements. In this case, 3−1=2. There are three subsets that each contain
two elements: {newspaper,magazine}, { newspaper,book}, and
{magazine,book}.

*Step 3:* Continue this process by listing all the proper subsets of the
set containing n(L)−2 elements. In this case, 3−2=1. There are three
subsets that contain one element: {newspaper}, {magazine}, and {book}.

*Step 4:* Finally, list the subset containing 0 elements, or the empty
set: {}.
::::

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
:::

[\#](#)
::::

:::: {#exam-00002 .example}
::: title
Determining Whether a Set Is a Proper Subset
:::

Consider the set of common political parties in the United States,
P={Democratic, Green, Libertarian, Republican}. Determine if the
following sets are proper subsets of P.

M

=

{

Democratic, Republican

}

G

=

{

Green

}

V

=

{

Republican, Libertarian, Green, Democratic

}

M is a proper subset of P, written symbolically as M⊂P because every
member of M is a member of set P, but P also contains at least one
element that is not in M. G is a single member proper subset of P,
written symbolically as G⊂P, because Green is a member of set P, but P
also contains other members (such as Democratic) that are not in G. V is
subset of P because every member of V is also a member of P, but it is
not a proper subset of P because there are no members of V that are not
also in set P. We can represent the relationship symbolically as V⊆P, or
more precisely, set V is equal to set P, V=P.
::::

:::: {#note-00005 .note}
::: title
:::

[\#](#)
::::

:::: {#exam-00003 .example}
::: title
Expressing the Relationship between Sets Symbolically
:::

Consider the subsets of a standard deck of cards: S={spades, hearts,
diamonds, clubs}; R={hearts, diamonds}; B={spades, clubs}; and
C={clubs}.

Express the relationship between the following sets symbolically.

Set

S

and set

B

.

Set

C

and set

B

.

Set

R

and

R

.

B⊂S. B is a proper subset of set S. C⊂B. C is a proper subset of set B.
R⊆RorR=R. R is subset of itself, but not a proper subset of itself
because R is equal to itself.
::::

:::: {#note-00006 .note}
::: title
:::

[\#](#)
::::

# Exponential Notation {#sect-00001}

So far, we have figured out how many subsets exist in a finite set by
listing them. Recall that in [\#](#), when we listed all the subsets of
the three-element set L={newspaper, magazine, book} we saw that there
are eight subsets. In [Your Turn 1.11](#), we discovered that there are
four subsets of the two-element subset, S={heads, tails}. A one-element
set has two subsets, the empty set and itself. The only subset of the
empty set is the empty set itself. But how can we easily figure out the
number of subsets in a very large finite set? It turns out that the
number of subsets can be found by raising 2 to the number of elements in
the set, using exponential notation to represent repeated
multiplication. For example, the number of subsets of the set
L={newspaper, magazine, book} is equal to 23=2⋅2⋅2=8. Exponential
notation is used to represent repeated multiplication, bn=b⋅b⋅b⋅...⋅b,
where b appears as a factor n times.

:::: {#note-00008 .note}
::: title
:::

The number of subsets of a finite set A is equal to 2 raised to the
power of n(A), where n(A) is the number of elements in set A: Number of
Subsets of Set A=2n(A).
::::

:::: {#note-00017 .note}
::: title
:::

*Note that* 20=1*, so this formula works for the empty set, also.*
::::

:::: {#exam-00004 .example}
::: title
Computing the Number of Subsets of a Set
:::

Find the number of subsets of each of the following sets.

The set of top five scorers of all time in the NBA:

S

=

{

LeBron James, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, Karl Malone, Kobe Bryant, Michael
Jordan

}

.

The set of the top four bestselling albums of all time:

A

=

{

Thriller, Hotel California, The Beatles White Album, Led Zepplin IV

}

.

R

=

{

Snap, Crackle, Pop

}

.

n(S)=5. So, the total number of subsets of Sis25=2⋅2⋅2⋅2⋅2=32. n(A)=4.
Therefore, the total number of subsets of Ais24=16. n(R)=3. So, the
total number of subsets of Ris23=8.
::::

:::: {#note-00009 .note}
::: title
:::

[\#](#)
::::

# Equivalent Subsets {#sect-00002}

In the early 17th century, the famous astronomer Galileo Galilei found
that the set of natural numbers and the subset of the natural numbers
consisting of the set of square numbers, n2, are equivalent. Upon making
this discovery, he conjectured that the concepts of less than, greater
than, and equal to did not apply to infinite sets.

Sequences and series are defined as infinite subsets of the set of
natural numbers by forming a relationship between the sequence or series
in terms of a natural number, n. For example, the set of even numbers
can be defined using set builder notation as {a\|a=2nwherenis a natural
number}. The formula in this case replaces every natural number with two
times the number, resulting in the set of even numbers, {2,4,6,...}. The
set of even numbers is also equivalent to the set of natural numbers.

:::: {#note-00010 .note}
::: title
Employment Opportunities
:::

You can make a career out of working with sets. Applications of
equivalent sets include relational database design and analysis.

Relational databases that store data are tables of related information.
Each row of a table has the same number of columns as every other row in
the table; in this way, relational databases are examples of set
equivalences for finite sets. In a relational database, a primary key is
set up to identify all related information. There is a one-to-one
relationship between the primary key and any other information
associated with it.

Database design and analysis is a high demand career with a median
entry-level salary of about \$85,000 per year, according to salary.com.
::::

:::: {#exam-00005 .example}
::: title
Writing Equivalent Subsets of an Infinite Set
:::

Using natural numbers, multiples of 3 are given by the sequence {3, 6,
9, ...}. Write this set using set builder notation by expressing each
multiple of 3 using a formula in terms of a natural number, n.

{m\|m=3nwherenis a natural number} or {m\|m=3nwheren∈N}. In this
example, m is a multiple of 3 and n is a natural number. The symbol ∈ is
read as "is a member or element of." Because there is a one-to-one
correspondence between the set of multiples of 3 and the natural
numbers, the set of multiples of 3 is an equivalent subset of the
natural numbers.
::::

:::: {#note-00011 .note}
::: title
:::

[\#](#)
::::

:::: {#exam-00006 .example}
::: title
Creating Equivalent Subsets of a Finite Set That Are Not Equal
:::

A fast-food restaurant offers a deal where you can select two options
from the following set of four menu items for \$6: a chicken sandwich, a
fish sandwich, a cheeseburger, or 10 chicken nuggets. Javier and his
friend Michael are each purchasing lunch using this deal. Create two
equivalent, but not equal, subsets that Javier and Michael could choose
to have for lunch.

The possible two-element subsets are: {chicken sandwich, fish sandwich},
{chicken sandwich, cheeseburger}, {chicken sandwich, chicken nuggets},
{fish sandwich, cheeseburger}, {fish sandwich, chicken nuggets}, and
{cheeseburger, chicken nuggets}. One possible solution is that Javier
picked the set {chicken sandwich, chicken nuggets}, while Michael chose
the {cheeseburger, chicken nuggets}. Because Javier and Michael both
picked two items, but not exactly the same two items, these sets are
equivalent, but not equal.
::::

:::: {#note-00012 .note}
::: title
:::

[\#](#)
::::

:::: {#exam-00007 .example}
::: title
Creating Equivalent Subsets of a Finite Set
:::

A high school volleyball team at a small school consists of the
following players: {Angie, Brenda, Colleen, Estella, Maya, Maria, Penny,
Shantelle}. Create two possible equivalent starting line-ups of six
players that the coach could select for the next game.

There are actually 28 possible ways that the coach could choose his
starting line-up. Two such equivalent subsets are {Angie, Brenda, Maya,
Maria, Penny, Shantelle} and {Angie, Brenda, Colleen, Estella, Maria,
Shantelle}. Each subset has six members, but they are not identical, so
the two sets are equivalent but not equal.
::::

:::: {#note-00013 .note}
::: title
:::

[\#](#)
::::

# Check Your Understanding {#sect-00003}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00004}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Key Terms {#sect-00006}

subset

proper subset

equivalent subsets

exponential notation

#  {#sect-00007}

Every member of a subset of a set is also a member of the set containing
it.

A

⊆

B

A proper subset of a set does not contain all the members of the set
containing it. There is a least one member of set

B

that is not a member of set

A

.

A

⊂

B

The number subsets of a finite set

A

with

n

(

A

)

members is equal to 2 raised to the

n

(

A

)

power.

The empty set is a subset of every set and must be included when listing
all the subsets of a set.

Understand how to create and distinguish between equivalent subsets of
finite and infinite sets that are not equal to the original set.

# Formulas {#sect-00012}

The number of subsets of a finite set A is equal to 2 raised to the
power of n(A), where n(A) is the number of elements in set A: Number of
Subsets of Set A=2n(A).
