m00013

4a4e1015-4f0b-42dc-a89f-7c5dc7cb4e79

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

# Learning Objectives {#sect-00010}

After completing this section, you should be able to:

Utilize a universal set with two sets to interpret a Venn diagram.

Utilize a universal set with two sets to create a Venn diagram.

Determine the complement of a set.

Have you ever ordered a new dresser or bookcase that required assembly?
When your package arrives you excitedly open it and spread out the
pieces. Then you check the assembly guide and verify that you have all
the parts required to assemble your new dresser. Now, the work begins.
Luckily for you, the assembly guide includes step-by-step instructions
with images that show you how to put together your product. If you are
really lucky, the manufacturer may even provide a URL or QR code
connecting you to an online video that demonstrates the complete
assembly process. We can likely all agree that assembly instructions are
much easier to follow when they include images or videos, rather than
just written directions. The same goes for the relationships between
sets.

# Interpreting Venn Diagrams {#sect-00001}

Venn diagrams are the graphical tools or pictures that we use to
visualize and understand relationships between sets. Venn diagrams are
named after the mathematician John Venn, who first popularized their use
in the 1880s. When we use a Venn diagram to visualize the relationships
between sets, the entire set of data under consideration is drawn as a
rectangle, and subsets of this set are drawn as circles completely
contained within the rectangle. The entire set of data under
consideration is known as the universal set.

Consider the statement: All trees are plants. This statement expresses
the relationship between the set of all plants and the set of all trees.
Because every tree is a plant, the set of trees is a subset of the set
of plants. To represent this relationship using a Venn diagram, the set
of plants will be our universal set and the set of trees will be the
subset. Recall that this relationship is expressed symbolically as:
Trees⊂Plants. To create a Venn diagram, first we draw a rectangle and
label the universal set "U=Plants." Then we draw a circle within the
universal set and label it with the word "Trees."

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

This section will introduce how to interpret and construct Venn
diagrams. In future sections, as we expand our knowledge of
relationships between sets, we will also develop our knowledge and use
of Venn diagrams to explore how multiple sets can be combined to form
new sets.

:::: {#exam-00001 .example}
::: title
Interpreting the Relationship between Sets in a Venn Diagram
:::

Write the relationship between the sets in the following Venn diagram,
in words and symbolically.

<figure id="fig-00004">

</figure>

The set of terriers is a subset of the universal set of dogs. In other
words, the Venn diagram depicts the relationship that all terriers are
dogs. This is expressed symbolically as T⊂U.
::::

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
:::

[\#](#)
::::

So far, the only relationship we have been considering between two sets
is the subset relationship, but sets can be related in other ways. Lions
and tigers are both different types of cats, but no lions are tigers,
and no tigers are lions. Because the set of all lions and the set of all
tigers do not have any members in common, we call these two sets
disjoint sets, or non-overlapping sets.

Two sets A and B are disjoint sets if they do not share any elements in
common. That is, if a is a member of set A, then a is not a member of
set B. If b is a member of set B, then b is not a member of set A. To
represent the relationship between the set of all cats and the sets of
lions and tigers using a Venn diagram, we draw the universal set of cats
as a rectangle and then draw a circle for the set of lions and a
separate circle for the set of tigers within the rectangle, ensuring
that the two circles representing the set of lions and the set of tigers
do not touch or overlap in any way.

<figure id="fig-00005">

</figure>

:::: {#exam-00002 .example}
::: title
Describing the Relationship between Sets
:::

Describe the relationship between the sets in the following Venn
diagram.

<figure id="fig-00006">

</figure>

The set of triangles and the set of squares are two disjoint subsets of
the universal set of two-dimensional figures. The set of triangles does
not share any elements in common with the set of squares. No triangles
are squares and no squares are triangles, but both squares and triangles
are 2D figures.
::::

:::: {#note-00004 .note}
::: title
:::

[\#](#)
::::

# Creating Venn Diagrams {#sect-00002}

The main purpose of a Venn diagram is to help you visualize the
relationship between sets. As such, it is necessary to be able to draw
Venn diagrams from a written or symbolic description of the relationship
between sets.

## Procedure {#sect-00003}

To create a Venn diagram:

Draw a rectangle to represent the universal set, and label it

U

=

set name

.

Draw a circle within the rectangle to represent a subset of the
universal set and label it with the set name.

:::: {#note-00009 .note}
::: title
:::

*If there are multiple disjoint subsets of the universal set, their
separate circles should not touch or overlap.*
::::

:::: {#exam-00003 .example}
::: title
Drawing a Venn Diagram to Represent the Relationship Between Two Sets
:::

Draw a Venn diagram to represent the relationship between each of the
sets.

All rectangles are parallelograms.

All women are people.

The set of rectangles is a subset of the set of parallelograms.

First, draw a rectangle to represent the universal set and label it with

U

=

Parallelograms

, then draw a circle completely within the rectangle, and label it with
the name of the set it represents,

R

=

Rectangles

.

<figure id="fig-00007">

</figure>

In this example, both letters and names are used to represent the sets
involved, but this is not necessary. You may use either letters or names
alone, as long as the relationship is clearly depicted in the diagram,
as shown below.

<figure id="fig-00008">

</figure>

or

<figure id="fig-00009">

</figure>

The universal set is the set of people, and the set of all women is a
subset of the set of people.

<figure id="fig-00010">

</figure>
::::

:::: {#note-00005 .note}
::: title
:::

[\#](#)
::::

:::: {#exam-00004 .example}
::: title
Drawing a Venn Diagram to Represent the Relationship Between Three Sets
:::

All bicycles and all cars have wheels, but no bicycle is a car. Draw a
Venn diagram to represent this relationship.

*Step 1:* The set of bicycles and the set of cars are both subsets of
the set of things with wheels. The universal set is the set of things
with wheels, so we first draw a rectangle and label it with U=Things
with Wheels.

*Step 2:* Because the set of bicycles and the set of cars do not share
any elements in common, these two sets are disjoint and must be drawn as
two circles that do not touch or overlap with the universal set.

<figure id="fig-00011">

</figure>
::::

:::: {#note-00006 .note}
::: title
:::

[\#](#)
::::

# The Complement of a Set {#sect-00004}

Recall that if set A is a proper subset of set U, the universal set
(written symbolically as A⊂U), then there is at least one element in set
U that is not in set A. The set of all the elements in the universal set
U that are not in the subset A is called the complement of set A, A\'.
In set builder notation this is written symbolically as: A\'={x∈U\|x∉A}.
The symbol ∈ is used to represent the phrase, "is a member of," and the
symbol ∉ is used to represent the phrase, "is not a member of." In the
Venn diagram below, the complement of set A is the region that lies
outside the circle and inside the rectangle. The universal set U
includes all of the elements in set A and all of the elements in the
complement of set A, and nothing else.

<figure id="fig-00012">

</figure>

Consider the set of digit numbers. Let this be our universal set,
U={0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9}. Now, let set A be the subset of U consisting of
all the prime numbers in set U, A={2,3,5,7}. The complement of set A is
A\'={0,1,4,6,8,9}. The following Venn diagram represents this
relationship graphically.

<figure id="fig-00013">

</figure>

:::: {#exam-00005 .example}
::: title
Finding the Complement of a Set
:::

For both of the questions below, A is a proper subset of U. Given the
universal set U={Billie Eilish, Donald Glover, Bruno Mars, Adele, Ed
Sheeran} and set A={Donald Glover, Bruno Mars, Ed Sheeran}, find A\'.
Given the universal set U={d\|d is a dog} and B={b ∈ U\|b is a beagle},
find B\'.

The complement of set

A

is the set of all elements in the universal set

U

that are not in set

A

.

A

\'

=

{

Billie Eilish, Adele

}

.

The complement of set

B

is the set of all dogs that are not beagles. All members of set

B

′

are in the universal set because they are dogs, but they are not in set

B

,

because they are not beagles. This relationship can be expressed in set
build notation as follows:

B

′

=

{

All dogs that are not beagles

.}

,

B

′

=

{

d

∈

U

\|

d

is not a beagle

.}

, or

B

′

=

{

d

∈

U

\|

d

∉

B

}

.
::::

:::: {#note-00008 .note}
::: title
:::

[\#](#)
::::

# Check Your Understanding {#sect-00005}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00006}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Key Terms {#sect-00008}

Venn diagram

universal set

disjoint set

complement of a set

# Key Concepts {#sect-00009}

A Venn diagram is a graphical representation of the relationship between
sets.

In a Venn diagram, the universal set,

U

is the largest set under consideration and is drawn as a rectangle. All
subsets of the universal set are drawn as circles within this rectangle.

The complement of set

A

includes all the members of the universal set that are not in set

A

. A set and its complement are disjoint sets, they do not share any
elements in common.

To find the complement of set

A

remove all the elements of set

A

from the universal set

U

, the set that includes only the remaining elements is the complement of
set

A

,

A

′

.

Determine the complement of a set using Venn diagrams, the roster method
and set builder notation.
