m00014

e8a3ff01-572e-4099-8766-7150c43c673d

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

# Learning Objectives {#sect-00001}

After completing this section, you should be able to:

Determine the intersection of two sets.

Determine the union of two sets.

Determine the cardinality of the union of two sets.

Apply the concepts of AND and OR to set operations.

Draw conclusions from Venn diagrams with two sets.

The movie *Yours, Mine, and Ours* was originally released in 1968 and
starred Lucille Ball and Henry Fonda. This movie, which is loosely based
on a true story, is about the marriage of Helen, a widow with eight
children, and Frank, a widower with ten children, who then have an
additional child together. The movie is a comedy that plays on the
interpersonal and organizational struggles of feeding, bathing, and
clothing twenty people in one household.

If we consider the set of Helen\'s children and the set of Frank\'s
children, then the child they had together is the intersection of these
two sets, and the collection of all their children combined is the union
of these two sets. In this section, we will explore the operations of
union and intersection as it relates to two sets.

# The Intersection of Two Sets {#sect-00002}

The members that the two sets share in common are included in the
intersection of two sets. To be in the intersection of two sets, an
element must be in both the first set and the second set. In this way,
the intersection of two sets is a logical AND statement. Symbolically, A
intersection B is written as: A∩B. A intersection B is written in set
builder notation as: A∩B={x\|x∈Aandx∈B}.

Let us look at Helen\'s and Frank\'s children from the movie *Yours,
Mine, and Ours.* Helen\'s children consist of the set H={Colleen, Nick,
Janette, Tommy, Jean, Phillip, Gerald, Theresa, Joseph} and Frank\'s
children are included in the set F={Mike, Rusty, Greg, Rosemary, Loise,
Susan, Veronica, Mary, Germaine, Joan, Joseph}. H intersection F is the
set of children they had together. H∩F={Joseph}, because Joseph is in
both set H and set F.

:::: {#exam-00001 .example}
::: title
Finding the Intersection of Set A and Set B
:::

Set A={1,3,5,7,9} and B={2,3,5,7}. Find A intersection B.

The intersection of sets A and B include the elements that set A and B
have in common: 3, 5, and 7. A∩B={3,5,7}.
::::

:::: {#note-00002 .note}
::: title
:::

[\#](#)
::::

Notice that if sets A and B are disjoint sets, then they do not share
any elements in common, and A intersection B is the empty set, as shown
in the Venn diagram below.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

:::: {#exam-00002 .example}
::: title
Determining the Intersection of Disjoint Sets
:::

Set A={0,2,4,6,8} and set B={1,3,5,7,9}. Find A∩B.

Because sets A and B are disjoint, they do not share any elements in
common. So, the intersection of set A and set B is the empty set. A∩B=∅.
::::

:::: {#note-00003 .note}
::: title
:::

[\#](#)
::::

Notice that if set A is a subset of set B, then A intersection B is
equal to set A, as shown in the Venn diagram below.

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

:::: {#exam-00003 .example}
::: title
Finding the Intersection of a Set and a Subset
:::

Set A={1,3,5,...} and set B=ℕ={1,2,3,...} Find A∩B.

Because set A is a subset of set B, A intersection B is equal to set A.
A∩B=A={1,3,5,...}, the set of odd natural numbers.
::::

:::: {#note-00004 .note}
::: title
:::

[\#](#)
::::

## The Union of Two Sets {#sect-00003}

Like the union of two families in marriage, the union of two sets
includes all the members of the first set and all the members of the
second set. To be in the union of two sets, an element must be in the
first set, the second set, or both. In this way, the union of two sets
is a logical inclusive OR statement. Symbolically, A union B is written
as: A∪B. A union B is written in set builder notation as:
A∪B={x\|x∈Aorx∈B}.

Let us consider the sets of Helen\'s and Frank\'s children from the
movie *Yours, Mine, and Ours* again. Helen\'s children is set
H={Colleen, Nick, Janette, Tommy, Jean, Phillip, Gerald, Theresa,
Joseph} and Frank\'s children is set F={Mike, Rusty, Greg, Rosemary,
Loise, Susan, Veronica, Mary, Germaine, Joan, Joseph}. The union of
these two sets is the collection of all nineteen of their children,
H∪F={Colleen, Nick, Janette, Tommy, Jean, Phillip, Gerald, Theresa,
Joseph, Mike, Rusty, Greg, Rosemary, Loise, Susan, Veronica, Mary,
Germaine, Joan}. Notice, Joseph is in both set H and set F, but he is
only one child, so, he is only listed once in the union.

:::: {#exam-00004 .example}
::: title
Finding the Union of Sets A and B When A and B Overlap
:::

Set A={1,3,5,7,9} and set B={2,3,5,7}. Find A union B.

A union B is the set formed by including all the unique elements in set
A, set B, or both sets A and B: A∪B={1,3,5,7,9,2}. The first five
elements of the union are the five unique elements in set A. Even though
3, 5, and 7 are also members of set B, these elements are only listed
one time. Lastly, set B includes the unique element 2, so 2 is also
included as part of the union of sets A and B.
::::

:::: {#note-00006 .note}
::: title
:::

[\#](#)
::::

When observing the union of sets A and B, notice that both set A and set
B are subsets of A union B. Graphically, A union B can be represented in
several different ways depending on the members that they have in
common. If A and B are disjoint sets, then A union B would be
represented with two disjoint circles within the universal set, as shown
in the Venn diagram below.

<figure id="fig-00004">

</figure>

If sets A and B share some, but not all, members in common, then the
Venn diagram is drawn as two separate circles that overlap.

<figure id="fig-00005">

</figure>

If every member of set A is also a member of set B, then A is a subset
of set B, and A union B would be equal to set B. To draw the Venn
diagram, the circle representing set A should be completely enclosed in
the circle containing set B.

<figure id="fig-00006">

</figure>

:::: {#exam-00005 .example}
::: title
Finding the Union of Sets A and B When A and B Are Disjoint
:::

Set A={0,2,4,6,8} and set B={1,3,5,7,9}. Find A∪B.

Because sets A and B are disjoint, the union is simply the set
containing all the elements in both set A and set B.
A∪B={0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9}.
::::

:::: {#note-00007 .note}
::: title
:::

[\#](#)
::::

:::: {#exam-00006 .example}
::: title
Finding the Union of Sets A and B When One Set is a Subset of the Other
:::

Set A={1,3,5,...} and set B=ℕ={1,2,3,...}. Find A∪B.

Because set A is a subset of set B, A union B is equal to set B.
A∪B=ℕ={1,2,3,...}=B.
::::

:::: {#note-00008 .note}
::: title
:::

[\#](#)
::::

:::: {#note-00009 .note}
::: title
:::

[The Basics of Intersection of Sets, Union of Sets and Venn Diagrams](#)
::::

:::: {#note-00010 .note}
::: title
Set Operation Practice
:::

Sets Challenge is an application available on both Android and iPhone
smartphones that allows you to practice and gain familiarity with the
operations of set union, intersection, complement, and difference.

<figure id="fig-00007">

</figure>

The Sets Challenge application/game uses some notation that differs from
the notation covered in the text. The complement of set A in this text
is written symbolically as A′, but the Sets Challenge game uses AC to
represent the complement operation. In the text we do not cover set
difference between two sets A and B, represented in the game as A−B. In
the game this operation removes from set A all the elements in A∩B. For
example, if set A={a,b,c,d} and set B={b,d,f,h} are subsets of the
universal set U={a,b,c,...,z}, then A−B={a,b,c,d}−{b,d}={a,c}, and
B−A={b,d,f,h}−{b,d}={f,h}. There is a project at the end of the chapter
to research the set difference operation.
::::

## Determining the Cardinality of Two Sets {#sect-00004}

The cardinality of the union of two sets is the total number of elements
in the set. Symbolically the cardinality of A union B is written,
n(A∪B). If two sets A and B are disjoint, the cardinality of A union B
is the sum of the cardinality of set A and the cardinality of set B. If
the two sets intersect, then A intersection B is a subset of both set A
and set B. This means that if we add the cardinality of set A and set B,
we will have added the number of elements in A intersection B twice, so
we must then subtract it once as shown in the formula that follows.

:::: {#note-00012 .note}
::: title
:::

The *cardinality of* A *union* B is found by adding the number of
elements in set A to the number of elements in set B, then subtracting
the number of elements in the intersection of set A and set B.
n(A∪B)=n(A)+n(B)−n(A∩B) or n(AorB)=n(A)+n(B)−n(AandB).
::::

:::: {#note-00021 .note}
::: title
:::

If sets A and B are disjoint, then n(A∩B)=n(AandB)=0 and the formula is
still valid, but simplifies to n(A∪B)=n(A)+n(B).
::::

:::: {#exam-00007 .example}
::: title
Determining the Cardinality of the Union of Two Sets
:::

The number of elements in set A is 10, the number of elements in set B
is 20, and the number of elements in A intersection B is 4. Find the
number of elements in A union B.

Using the formula for determining the cardinality of the union of two
sets, we can say n(A∪B)=n(A)+n(B)−n(A∩B)=10+20−4=26.
::::

:::: {#note-00013 .note}
::: title
:::

[\#](#)
::::

:::: {#exam-00008 .example}
::: title
Determining the Cardinality of the Union of Two Disjoint Sets
:::

If A and B are disjoint sets and the cardinality of set A is 37 and the
cardinality of set B is 43, find the cardinality of A union B.

To find the cardinality of A union B, apply the formula,
n(A∪B)=n(A)+n(B)−n(A∩B). Because sets A and B are disjoint, A∩B is the
empty set, therefore n(A∩B)=n(∅)=0 and n(A∪B)=37+43−0=80.
::::

:::: {#note-00014 .note}
::: title
:::

[\#](#)
::::

## Applying Concepts of "AND" and "OR" to Set Operations {#sect-00005}

To become a licensed driver, you must pass some form of written test and
a road test, along with several other requirements depending on your
age. To keep this example simple, let us focus on the road test and the
written test. If you pass the written test but fail the road test, you
will not receive your license. If you fail the written test, you will
not be allowed to take the road test and you will not receive a license
to drive. To receive a driver\'s license, you must pass the written test
AND the road test. For an "AND" statement to be true, both conditions
that make up the statement must be true. Similarly, the intersection of
two sets A and B is the set of elements that are in both set A and set
B. To be a member of A intersection B, an element must be in set A and
also must be in set B. The intersection of two sets corresponds to a
logical \"AND\" statement.

The union of two sets is a logical inclusive \"OR\" statement. Say you
are at a birthday party and the host offers Leah, Lenny, Maya, and you
some cake or ice cream for dessert. Leah asks for cake, Lenny accepts
both cake and ice cream, Maya turns down both, and you choose only ice
cream. Leah, Lenny, and you are all having dessert. The "OR" statement
is true if at least one of the components is true. Maya is the only one
who did not have cake or ice cream; therefore, she did not have dessert
and the "OR" statement is false. To be in the union of two sets A and B,
an element must be in set A or set B or both set A and set B.

:::: {#exam-00009 .example}
::: title
Applying the \"AND\" or \"OR\" Operation
:::

A={0,3,6,9,12},B={0,4,8,12,16}, and C={1,2,3,5,8,13}.

Find the set consisting of elements in:

A

and

B

.

A

or

B

.

A

or

C

.

(

B

and

C

)

or

A

.

AandB=A∩B={0,12}, because only the elements 0 and 12 are members of both
set A and set B. AorB=A∪B={0,3,4,6,8,9,12,16}, because the set A or B is
the collection of all elements in set A or set B, or both.
AorC=A∪C={0,1,2,3,5,6,8,9,12,13}, because the set A or C is the
collection of all elements in set A or set C, or both.
(BandC)orA=(B∩C)∪A. Parentheses are evaluated first: (BandC)=B∩C={8},
because the only member that both set B and set C share in common is 8.
So, now we need to find {8}or{0,3,6,9,12}, Because the word translates
to the union operation, the problem becomes {8}∪{0,3,6,9,12}, which is
equal to {0,3,6,8,9,12}.
::::

:::: {#note-00015 .note}
::: title
:::

[\#](#)
::::

:::: {#exam-00010 .example}
::: title
Determine and Apply the Appropriate Set Operations to Solve the Problem
:::

Don Woods is serving cake and ice cream at his Juneteenth celebration.
The party has a total of 54 guests in attendance. Suppose 30 guests
requested cake, 20 guests asked for ice cream, and 12 guests did not
have either cake or ice cream.

How many guests had cake or ice cream?

How many guests had cake and ice cream?

The total number of people at the party is 54, and 12 people did not
have cake or ice cream. Recall that the total number of elements in the
universal set is always equal to the number of elements in a subset plus
the number of elements in the complement of the set, n(U)=n(A)+n(A′).
That means 54=n(cake or ice cream)+n(not(cake or ice cream)), or
equivalently,n(cake∪ice cream)=54−n((cake∪ice cream)′)=54−12=42. A total
of 42 people at the party had cake or ice cream. To determine the number
of people who had both cake and ice cream, we need to find the
intersection of the set of people who had cake and the set of people who
had ice cream. From Question 1, the number of people who had cake or ice
cream is 42. This is the union of the two sets. The formula for the
union of two sets is n(A∪B)=n(A)+n(B)−n(A∩B). Use the information given
in the problem and substitute the known values into the formula to solve
for the number of people in the intersection: 42=30+20−n(A∩B). Adding 30
and 20, the equation simplifies to 42=50−n(cake and ice cream). Which
means n(cake and ice cream)=50−42=8.
::::

:::: {#note-00016 .note}
::: title
:::

[\#](#)
::::

:::: {#note-00017 .note}
::: title
The Real Inventor of the Venn Diagram
:::

John Venn, in his writings, references works by both John Boole and
Augustus De Morgan, who referred to the circle diagrams commonly used to
present logical relationships as Euler\'s circles. Leonhard Euler\'s
works were published over 100 years prior to Venn\'s, and Euler may have
been influenced by the works of Gottfried Leibniz.

So, why does John Venn get all the credit for these graphical
depictions? Venn was the first to formalize the use of these diagrams in
his book *Symbolic Logic,* published in 1881. Further, he made
significant improvements in their design, including shading to highlight
the region of interest. The mathematician C.L. Dodgson, also known as
Lewis Carroll, built upon Venn's work by adding an enclosing universal
set.

Invention is not necessarily coming up with an initial idea. It is about
seeing the potential of an idea and applying it to a new situation.

References:

Margaret E. Baron. \"A Note on the Historical Development of Logic
Diagrams: Leibniz, Euler and Venn.\" *The Mathematical Gazette*, vol.
53, no. 384, 1969, pp. 113-125. *JSTOR*, www.jstor.org/stable/3614533.
Accessed 15 July 2021.

Deborah Bennett. \"Drawing Logical Conclusions.\" *Math Horizons*, vol.
22, no. 3, 2015, pp. 12-15. *JSTOR*,
www.jstor.org/stable/10.4169/mathhorizons.22.3.12. Accessed 15 July
2021.
::::

## Drawing Conclusions from a Venn Diagram with Two Sets {#sect-00006}

All Venn diagrams will display the relationships between the sets, such
as subset, intersecting, and/or disjoint. In addition to displaying the
relationship between the two sets, there are two main additional details
that Venn diagrams can include: the individual members of the sets or
the cardinality of each disjoint subset of the universal set.

A Venn diagram with two subsets will partition the universal set into 3
or 4 sections depending on whether they are disjoint or intersecting
sets. Recall that the complement of set A, written A′, is the set of all
elements in the universal set that are not in set A.

<figure id="fig-00008">

</figure>

:::: {#exam-00011 .example}
::: title
Using a Venn Diagram to Draw Conclusions about Set Membership
:::

<figure id="fig-00009">

</figure>

Find A∪B. Find A∩B. Find B′. Find n(B′).

A∪B={1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8}, because A union B is the collection of all
elements in set A or set B or both. Because A and B are disjoint sets,
there are no elements that are in both A and B. Therefore, A
intersection B is the empty set, A∩B=∅. The complement of set B is the
set of all elements in the universal set that are not in set B:
B′={0,1,3,5,7,9}. The cardinality, or number of elements in set
B′,isn(B′)=6.
::::

:::: {#note-00018 .note}
::: title
:::

[\#](#)
::::

:::: {#exam-00012 .example}
::: title
Using a Venn Diagram to Draw Conclusions about Set Cardinality
:::

<figure id="fig-00010">

</figure>

Find

n

(

A

or

B

)

.

Find

n

(

A

and

B

)

.

Find

n

(

A

)

.

The number of elements in

A

or

B

is the number of elements in

A

union

B

:

n

(

A

∪

B

)

=

n

(

{

2

,

5

,

7

}

)

=

14

.

The number of elements in

A

and

B

is the number of elements in

A

intersection

B

:

n

(

A

∩

B

)

=

5

.

The number of elements in set

A

is the sum of all the numbers enclosed in the circle representing set

A

:

n

(

A

)

=

n

(

{

7

,

5

}

)

=

12

.
::::

:::: {#note-00019 .note}
::: title
:::

[\#](#)
::::

# Check Your Understanding {#sect-00007}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

#  {#sect-00008}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Key Terms {#sect-00010}

intersection of two sets

union of two sets

# Key Concepts {#sect-00011}

The intersection of two sets,

A

∩

B

is the set of all elements that they have in common. Any member of

A

intersection

B

must be is both set

A

and set

B

.

The union of two sets,

A

∪

B

, is the collection of all members that are in either in set

A

, set

B

or both sets

A

and

B

combined.

Two sets that share at least one element in common, so that they are not
disjoint are represented in a Venn Diagram using two circles that
overlap.

The region of the overlap is the set

A

intersection

B

,

A

∩

B

.

The regions that include everything in the circle representing set

A

or the circle representing set

B

or their overlap is the set

A

union

B

,

A

∪

B

.

Apply knowledge of set union and intersection to determine cardinality
and membership using Venn Diagrams, the roster method and set builder
notation.

# Formulas {#sect-00012}

The cardinality of A union B:n(A∪B)=n(A)+n(B)−n(A∩B)

# Video {#sect-00013}

The Basics of Intersection of Sets, Union of Sets and Venn Diagrams
